Brexit: 'Election in October' if MPs block no deal
Boris Johnson: "I don't want an election, you don't want an election"
The government is expected to table a motion to hold a general election on 14 October if it is defeated by MPs opposed to a no-deal Brexit on Tuesday.
Boris Johnson said he did not want an election, but progress with the EU would be "impossible" if they won.
Tory rebels are joining forces with Labour to bring a bill designed to stop the UK leaving the EU on 31 October without an agreement.
It would force the PM to request a delay to 31 January 2020 in that event.
Speaking outside No 10 earlier, Mr Johnson insisted that with MPs' backing, he would be able to achieve changes to the UK's current Brexit deal - negotiated by Theresa May and rejected three times in the Commons - at an EU summit on 17 October.
But he said if MPs voted to block no deal they would "plainly chop the legs out from under the UK position".
The PM said there were "no circumstances" in which he personally would ask Brussels to delay Brexit and UK negotiators must be allowed to get on with their work without interference from Westminster.
"Let us get on with the people's agenda, fighting crime, improving the NHS, boosting schools, cutting the cost of living, and unlocking talent and opportunity across the entire United Kingdom."
Faced with Mr Johnson's promise to leave the EU on 31 October, with or without a deal, a number of MPs have come together across party lines to try to prevent the latter outcome.
They are expected to put forward legislation on Tuesday under Standing Order 24 - a Commons rule which allows urgent debates to be called.
The bill, which has now been published by Labour MP Hilary Benn, would force the PM to request a Brexit delay to 31 January 2020 unless MPs had approved a new deal, or voted in favour of a no deal departure, by 19 October.
Tory rebels - who include former ministers and prominent backbenchers - have been warned that those who support the legislation face being expelled from the party and deselected.
But leading figures, including ex-Justice Secretary David Gauke, have insisted that despite the threat, they will press ahead and - in their words - put the "national interest" ahead of their own.
Speaking at an event on Monday evening, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn told supporters his party was ready for a vote, adding: "I will be delighted when the election comes."
"I'm ready for it, you're ready for it, we're ready for it."
He accused Mr Johnson of "threatening people with a no-deal Brexit if he doesn't get his way in Parliament".
Did Boris Johnson just announce an election without actually announcing an election?
He's always said that he really doesn't want to go to the country again.
Downing Street is still absolutely adamant that is still the case, and again with the formality of the No 10 podium, he insisted it was not what he wanted to do.
But he also made plain that there were no circumstances in which he would ask Brussels to delay our departure from the EU.
And that means only one thing. 
Calling an election if, in his view, he needs to. 
When would he need to do that?
Soon.
There is not due to be another general election until 2022.
Under the Fixed Terms Parliament Act, Mr Johnson would require the backing of two-thirds of the UK's 650 MPs to trigger an early poll this autumn.
Should this happen, the prime minister would be able to recommend the date - likely to be a hugely contentious issue given the looming Brexit deadline - to the Queen.
If there is an election before the end of 2019, it would be the third in the past five years, after polls in 2015 and 2017.
What does the no-deal bill say?
The legislation to be put forward on Tuesday seeks to tie Boris Johnson's hands, and instructs him to ask the EU for an extension of the Brexit process until 31 January 2020.
A lot of attention will be on the clause which says that if the European Council proposes an extension to a different date, then the prime minister must accept it within two days, unless that extension has been rejected by the House of Commons.
In other words, the power to decide will lie with members of Parliament not with the government.
For a PM who has promised to leave on 31 October come what may, it would seem to be impossible to accept.
Hence all the talk of an early election. 
We will know for sure before the end of this week.
Hurricane Dorian: Bahamas sees unprecedented devastation
Hurricane Dorian appears to have cause unprecedented devastation in the Bahamas the country's leader says.
The storm, the second strongest Atlantic hurricane on record remains extremely dangerous said prime minister Hubert Minnis.
Some 13,000 houses are feared damaged or destroyed, according to the International Red Cross.
Pictures showed surging floodwaters, upturned cars and snapped trees.
Eyewitness videos and reports paint a picture of massive and widespread flooding, with panicked families fleeing to their roofs to escape rising floodwaters.
One death has been reported.
Dorian is the most powerful storm to hit the Bahamas since records began and will later move "dangerously close" to the US east coast, according to forecasters.
It hit the Bahamas as a category five hurricane but has now weakened to a category four with maximum sustained winds near 150 miles per hour. 
Dorian will however remain "a powerful hurricane during the next couple of days".
The NHC said that only a slight deviation in the path of the storm could bring Dorian directly over Florida's east coast, which is already expected to face life-threatening storm surges and dangerous winds over the next couple of days.
The US states of Florida, Georgia, North and South Carolina have all declared states of emergency.
What's the latest from the Bahamas?
The storm is moving very slowly over Grand Bahama, having earlier made landfall on the Abaco Islands which are just to the east.
It has brought ferocious winds and massive amounts of water to both areas, which are in the north of the Bahamas archipelago. 
Grand Bahama, with a population of about 50,000, is only 100 kilometers east of West Palm Beach in Florida.
Forecasters had warned the storm could create "life-threatening" storm surges as high as 23 feet.
Clint Watson, a journalist based in the capital Nassau, said people in Grand Bahama were being hit with "buckets of rain" and posting videos online showing water rising to the windows of their attics.
"You can't fathom that but that's what people are showing us with their videos, saying 'Please, come and rescue me. 
I'm in the roof of my home and this is where the water is'. 
And you can see the water outside pressing in. 
It's stories like that and images like that that you can't get out of your mind," he told the BBC.
Local media report that the international airport is under water.
